
Reflection

The Budget Tracker project gave me a chance to know Python in a more realistic manner. I also knew how to use classes to structure my code, in particular the Transaction, Income and Expense classes. Prior to this project, I was familiar with the fundamental concept of OOP, but everything became apparent once I created something with it. I have also learned about the functions that make a program manageable rather than placing all the notions of a program into a single long script.

One more valuable lesson that I was able to learn was how to manipulate the flow of a program with the help of loops and conditionals. Compiling the menu taught me to instruct the user in every step of the way and ensure that the program will respond in the right way based on their selection. My handling of user inputs also improved. Previously my program would crash when somebody entered something wrong but now I would know how to validate the input, especially positive quantities.

There were some obstacles which I encountered. The summary totals caused me only one difficulty as I found it hard to debug when they would not display as planned. I had to make everything go one after the other and to know what my code was actually up to. The filtering feature was another difficulty. The first thing was confusing because I had to make sure that I examined various conditions without breaking the program. The filter sometimes would display all, and sometimes nothing. I realised that I was confused in my logic, at least in categories comparison and lower (uppersale) case. The only way to find out the cause of the error was to write the filtering section step by step, test various cases and print out the values to develop the filtering section. Once the simplifying of the conditions and ensuring the comparisons were comparable, then the filtering began to operate as I desired.

To enhance the project, given that I had more time, I would save the data in files to prevent the loss of the transactions as I shut the program. Other things that I would do are make the menu more user friendly and give more error messages, one that would state what exactly went wrong rather than stating that there was an invalid input. I would consider adding some more sophisticated filters in the future, such as filters by dates or totals per month. In general, this project enabled me to become more familiar with Python and become more self-confident in my ability to write programs independently.